
## A2.2 Equations of Static Equilibrium.

To completely define a force, we must know
its magnitude, direction, and point of application. These facts regarding the force are
generally referred to as the characteristics of
the force. Sometimes the more general term of
line of action or location is used as a force
characteristic in place of point of application
designation.


A force acting in space is completely
defined if we know its components in three
directions and its moments about 3 axes, for
example $F_x$, $F_y$, $F_z$ and $M_x$, $M_y$ and $M_z$. For
equilibrium or a force system there can be no
resultant force and thus the equations of
equilibrium are obtained by equating the force
and moment components to zero. The equations
of static equilibrium for the various types of
force systems will now be summarized.


### EQUILIBRIUM EQUATIONS FOR GENERAL SPACE (NON-COPLANAR) FORCE SYSTEM

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{alignedat}{2}
&\sum F_x = 0               &\sum M_1 = 0\\
&\sum F_y = 0 \text{~~~~} &\sum M_2 = 0\\
&\sum F_z = 0               &\sum M_3 = 0\\
\end{alignedat} 
\tag{2.1}
\end{equation}
$$


Thus for a general space force system,
there are 6 equations of static equilibrium
available. Three of these and no more can be
force equations. It is often more convenient
to take the moment axes, 1, 2 and 3, as any set
of x, y and z axes. All 6 equations could be
moment equations about 6 different axes. The
force equations are written for 3 mutually
perpendicular axes and need not be the x, y
and z axes.


### EQUILIBRIUM OF SPACE CONCURRENT-FORCE SYSTEM

Concurrent means that all forces of the
force system pass through a common point. The
resultant, if any, must therefore be a force
and not a moment and thus only 3 equations are
necessary to completely define the condition
that the resultant must be zero. The equations
of equilibrium available are therefore:-

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{alignedat}{3}
&\sum F_x = 0 &&              &\sum M_1 = 0\\
&\sum F_y = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &\sum M_2 = 0\\
&\sum F_z = 0 &&              &\sum M_3 = 0\\
\end{alignedat} 
\tag{2.2}
\end{equation}
$$

A combination of force and moment equations
to make a total of not more than 3 can be used.
For the moment equations, axes through the point
of concurrency cannot be used since all forces
of the system pass through this point. The
moment axes need not be the same direction as
the directions used in the force equations but
of course, they could be.


### EQUILIBRIUM OF SPACE PARALLEL-FORCE SYSTEM

In a parallel force system the direction of
all forces is known, but the magnitude and
location of each is unknown. Thus to determine
magnitude, one equation is required and for
location two equations are necessary since the
force is not confined to one plane. In general
the 3 equations commonly used to make the resultant zero for this type of force system are
one force equation and two moment equations.
For example, for a space parallel-force system
acting in the y direction, the equations of
equilibrium would be:

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
\sum F_y = 0\\
\sum M_x = 0\\
\sum M_z = 0 \\
\end{split}
\tag{2.3}
\end{equation}
$$


### EQUILIBRIUM OF GENERAL CO-PLANAR FORCE SYSTEM

In this type of force system all forces lie
in one plane and it takes only 3 equations to
determine the magnitude, direction and location
of the resultant of such a force system. Either
force or moment equations can be used, except
that a maximum of 2 force equations can be used.
For example, for a force system acting in the
xy plane, the following combination of equilibrium equations could be used.


$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{alignedat}{7}
&\sum F_x = 0 &&              &&\sum F_x = 0    &&              &&\sum F_y = 0    &&              &\sum M_{z1} = 0\\
&\sum M_y = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &&\sum M_{z1} = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &&\sum M_{z1} = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &\sum M_{z2} = 0\\
&\sum M_z = 0 &&              &&\sum M_{z2} = 0 &&              &&\sum M_{z2} = 0 &&              &\sum M_{z3} = 0\\
\end{alignedat} 
\tag{2.4}
\end{equation}
$$

(The subscripts 1, 2 and 3 refer to different
locations for z axes or moment centers.)





### EQUILIBRIUM OF COPLANAR-CONCURRENT-FORCE SYSTEM

Since all forces lie in the same plane and
also pass through a common point, the magnitude
and direction of the resultant of this type of
force system is unknown but the location is
known since the point of concurrency is on the
line of action of the resultant. Thus only two
equations of equilibrium are necessary to define
the resultant and make it zero. The combinations available are,


$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{alignedat}{7}
&\sum F_x = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &&\sum F_x = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &&\sum F_y = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &\sum M_{z1} = 0\\
&\sum F_y = 0 &&              &&\sum M_z = 0 &&              &&\sum M_z = 0 &&              &\sum M_{z2} = 0\\
\end{alignedat} 
\tag{2.5}
\end{equation}
$$

(The z axis or moment center locations must be
other than through the point of concurrency)



### EQUILIBRIUM OF CO-PLANAR PARALLEL FORCE SYSTEM

Since the direction of all forces in this
type of force system is known and since the
forces all lie in the same plane, it only takes
2 equations to define the magnitude and location
of the resultant of such a force system. Hence,
there are only 2 equations of eqUilibrium available for this type of force system, namely, a
force and moment equation or two moment
equations. For example, for forces parallel to
the y axis and located in the xy plane the
equilibrium equations available would be: 

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{alignedat}{3}
&\sum F_y = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &\sum M_{z1} = 0\\
&\sum M_z = 0 &&              &\sum M_{z2} = 0\\
\end{alignedat} 
\tag{2.6}
\end{equation}
$$

(The moment centers 1 and 2 cannot be on the
same y axis)


### EQUILIBRIUM OF COLINEAR FORCE SYSTEM

A colinear force system is one where all
forces act along the same line or, in other
words, the direction and location of the forces
are known but their magnitudes are unknown;
thus only magnitude needs to be found to define
the resultant of a colinear force system. Thus
only one equation of eqUilibrium is available,
namely

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{alignedat}{3}
&\sum F_z = 0 &&\text{~~or~~} &\sum M_{z1} = 0
\end{alignedat} 
\tag{2.7}
\end{equation}
$$

where moment center 1 is not on the line of
action of the force system

