## A2.5 Statically Determinate and Statically Indeterminate Structures.


A statically determinate structure is one
in which all external reactions and internal
stresses for a given load system can be found
by use of the equations of static equilibrium,
and a statically indeterminate structure is
one in which all reactions and internal stresses
cannot be found by using only the equations of
equilibrium.


A statically determinate structure is one
that has just enough external reactions, or
just enough internal members, to make the
structure stable under a load system, and if
one reaction or member is removed, the structure
is reduced to a linkage or a mechanism and is
therefore not further capable of resisting the
load system. If the structure has more external reactions or internal members than is
necessary for stability of the structure under
a given load system it is statically indeterminate, 
and the degree of redundancy depends on
the number of unknowns beyond that number which
can be found by the equations of static equilibrium. 
A structure can be statically indeterminate with respect to external reactions alone
or to internal stresses alone or to both.


The additional equations that are needed
to solve a statically indeterminate structure
are obtained by considering the distortion of
the structure. This means that the size of all
members and the material from which members are
made must be known since distortions must be
calculated. In a statically determinate
structure this information on sizes and material
is not required but only the configuration of
the structure as a whole. Thus design analysis
for statically determinate structures is
straightforward, whereas a general trial and
error procedure is required for design analysis
of statically indeterminate structures.
